# Database :o2: Excercises

:o2: attending markdown session mandatory

## E.Datacenter.2.a

[@EnergyCost-sp20-516-234]

[@DCCost-sp20-516-234]

## E.Datacenter.2.b

Cyrus One is company with data centers across the world satisfying computing needs for their customers by offering more 
than 45 data centers globally [@CyrusOne-sp20-516-234]. The data center highlighted in this exercise is located in downtown Cincinnati, Ohio and 
is one of five in the metro area. 

The data center is used for production co-location, back-up and recovery, and business continuity. While Cyrus one 
designates different purposes for their data centers this one highlights its focus on disaster recovery. The facility is
 425,000 sq feet with 212,000 sq feet designated for co-location specifically. It is Cincinnati's primary switching facility 
 on the FEMA priority list[@CyrusOneCincinnati-sp20-516-234].  

The data center has multiple redundant power sources to ensure it has a 100% service uptime. According to the Cyrus One
 website for this location the data center has 7 dedicated substations, 6 independent circuits to deliver power, and 40000
  gallon fueled capacity for 2 dedicated generators. It also has a 13 MW capacity[@CyrusOneFactSheet-sp20-516-234].

To normalize the temperature in the facility the Cyrus One downtown Cincinnati data center uses a raised floor design in 
tandem with multiple cooling systems. This facility uses a water cooling design comprised of 1200 ton Centrifugal chillers 
and a closed loop chilled water cooling design. It also cools the air with a Hunt Air ACU that has a variable-speed fan 
system on all halls or levels[[@CyrusOneCincinnati-sp20-516-234].

## E.Datacenter.3

Per entering my data into the Berkeley Carbon Footprint Calculator, I received a calculated carbon footprint of 20 tons 
of C02eq/yr. This is equivalent to about 40000 lbs of carbon[@CO2Calc-sp20-516-234].

## E.Datacenter.4

Data centers produce an excessive amount of heat based on the number of servers running in their facilities. Some 
facilities have started to route their heat to on site and off site locations to be used and recycled for useful 
purposes such as heating homes, offices, greenhouses, etc[@DCRecycler-sp20-516-234].

The rows of data centers tend to be heated between 80-115 degrees F. It is common for data centers to use heat pumps to 
boost the temperature of waste heat to make it more viable for heating external buildings[@HeatHomes-sp20-516-234]. The heat is often transferred 
from the air into a liquid or a different medium than just the air. Transferring the heat into liquids can make it easier 
to transfer the heat generated at the data center and incorporate it into different external heating systems[@HeatHomes-sp20-516-234]. 
 
Facebook and Amazon are making use of this heat recycling technique to make their data centers more sustainable. Heat 
recycling is also a good way to benefit the community from the perspective of these companies because the heat is often transferred
into the larger heating network of the surrounding area once it has been captured. Specifically, the Facebook Odense
data center in Denmark makes use of the heat recycling technology in an effort to boost sustainability. This data center
captures the heat generated by its servers by heating water coils and heating water which is then pumped to a heat pump facility
to further raise the temperature. That water is then distributed to the heating network for the surrounding neighborhood. 
This data center, according to Facebook, will recover 100000 MWh or energy per year, which is enough to heat 6900 homes[@HeatHomes-sp20-516-234].

In Seattle Amazon is also making use of recycled data center heat to heat it's headquarters. The heat recycled from a nearby 
data center owned by Westin Building Exchange. This system uses the same system of transferring heat to water and then pumping
it to the desired building to be heated further as needed and used to heat the building itself[@AmazonHeatCenter-sp20-516-234]. These two examples show 
the potential of this recycling technique and it's acceptance by some of the biggest players in the industry. Heat recycling 
seems on a path to drive more symbiotic relationships between communities and the companies building data centers in the 
neighborhoods.

## E.Datacenter.5

Denmark is a global leader in adopting renewable energy. The government has set aggressive goals for adopting various sources
of electricity not based on fossil fuels into the country's electric grid including wind and hydro electric power. 
The government set big milestones for the next thirty years. First, the set a goal to get more than half of it's energy from wind
by 2020. Then, it's larger goal is to be powered 100% by renewables by 2050[@DenmarkRen-sp20-516-234].

As of 2010, the country was still heavily dependant on coal with 44% of total power generated by the fossil fuel[@DenmarkRen-sp20-516-234]. Over 
the coming years Denmark would shift it's power generation away from coal. As of the end of 2018 Denmark was the leader 
in total capacity generated by wind and the second place leader in power generated by hydro electric. Denmark also introduced
heat pumps in multiple district networks which allowed for heat recycling to be introduced in areas where data centers 
were being built, such as Odense[@Ren21-sp20-516-234].

Denmark has developed a global reputation for being a leader in renewables and has come a long way since 2010. According to 
Ren21's 2019 report Denmark was the number one country for generating electricity via renewables at 51%, this beat their set goal
of over 50% renewable electricity generation by two years. While setting lofty goals for overall power generation, Denmark
has set some societal standards that impact the day to day of it's citizens. The government has set regulations on .9% biofuel
mandate for 2020 as well as standards for building efficiency and solar heating requirements. Overall Denmark is global leader
in just about every way regarding the push to renewables and could be a good model for many other countries[@Ren21-sp20-516-234].

## E.Datacenter.8

In August 2016 Delta Airlines had a significant data center outage that impacted it's business for a three day period. This 
outage would cost the airline upwards of an estimated $150 million[@ListDataCenterFail-sp20-516-234] "illustrating that major airlines have a lot more 
at stake when designing and managing critical infrastructure than most other data center operators". This data center outage
impacted Delta Airlines for five hours, but would take them three days to right it's business operations[@DeltaOutage2-sp20-516-234].
 
According to a 2016 study conducted by the Poneman Institute, the mean cost per minute of a data center outage is $8,851. 
Using that to calculate the total cost of the outage alone, not including estimated business loss for Delta, was $2,655,300[@DCOutages-sp20-516-234].
It is easy to see the wide range of the impact a 5 hour outage when considering the outage, on average, cost Delta over $2.5 million, 
but the total estimated loss for the company was around $150 million. To close the gap from 2 to 150 million dollars in loss
the total operational expense must be considered. The outage resulted in Delta having to ground over 2000 flights. This 
significant number of groundings resulted in delays and cancellations that amounted a to significant number or refunds[@DeltaOutage2-sp20-516-234].

Beyond the direct monetary hit Delta took, the impact on the companies reputation must also be considered. 
The company benefits from people viewing it as reliable and safe for their transportation needs, but if a data center outage 
can grind their operations to a halt for three days in a specific region impacting thousands of people, Delta loses public trust.
Overall, however, the impact of the outage did not impact their investors perception of the company[@DeltaOutage1-sp20-516-234]. Assessing the root cause 
of the outage is critical to understand how to prevent similar situations in the future for such a central component of
Delta's day to day operations. This assessment showed that the center failed due to electrical equipment failure and an 
insufficient backup system that did automatically kick on[@DeltaOutage4-sp20-516-234]. This alone shows a good example of the importance of redundancy
in a data center to ensure uptime and prevent extremely costly outage events that impact not just companies, but the 
people who rely on those companies in their daily lives. 
 